[Documentation][Refund] Add cookbook about refund customization (#12717)
Sylius/Sylius: docs/cookbook/payments/custom-field-on-refund-payment.rst

Why do you want to add a custom field to refund payment?
========================================================

> Refund Plugin provides generic solution for refunding orders, it is enough for a basic refund but many shops need more custom functionalities.
> In this Cookbook we will show you how to customize refund payment but the similar approach you can use in different case.
> Refunds are processes with flow command -> handler -> event -> listener, and this flow we need to customise.
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refund Plugin provides a generic solution for refunding orders, it is enough for a basic refund but many shops need more custom functionalities.

For example, one may need to add refund payments scheduling, as they may be paid once a month.

How to add a field to the refund form?
---------------------------------------

The refund form is a form used to create the Refund Payment, thus in order to add a field to this form,
you need to first add it to the Refund Payment's model.

Refunds are processed with such a flow: ``command -> handler -> event -> listener``, and this flow we will also need to customize in order to process the data from the new field.

In this customization, we will be extending the refund form with a ``scheduledAt`` field, 
which might be used then for scheduling the payments in the payment gateway.

```

> Add custom field to refund payment
> ----------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add the custom field to the Refund Payment:
```

Extended refund payment should look like this:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    declare(strict_types=1);

    namespace App\Entity;

    use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping as ORM;
    use Sylius\RefundPlugin\Entity\RefundPayment as BaseRefundPayment;

    /**
     * @ORM\Entity
     * @ORM\Table(name="sylius_refund_refund_payment")
     */
    class RefundPayment extends BaseRefundPayment implements RefundPaymentInterface
    {
        /**
         * @var \DateTime|null
         *

>          * @ORM\Column(type="datetime", nullable="true", name="future_payment_date")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         * @ORM\Column(type="datetime", nullable="true", name="scheduled_at")
```

         */

>         protected $futurePaymentDate;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        protected $scheduledAt;
```
I think it was mentioned in the task @AdamKasp :)

        public function getFuturePaymentDate(): ?\DateTime
        {
            return $this->futurePaymentDate;
        }

        public function setFuturePaymentDate(\DateTime $futurePaymentDate): void
        {
            $this->futurePaymentDate = $futurePaymentDate;
        }
    }

It should implement a new interface:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    declare(strict_types=1);

    namespace App\Entity;

    use Sylius\RefundPlugin\Entity\RefundPaymentInterface as BaseRefundPaymentInterface;

    interface RefundPaymentInterface extends BaseRefundPaymentInterface
    {
        public function getFuturePaymentDate(): ?\DateTime;

        public function setFuturePaymentDate(\DateTime $date): void;
    }

Remember to update resource configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # config/packages/sylius_refund.yaml
    sylius_resource:
    resources:
        sylius_refund.refund_payment:
            classes:
                model: App\Entity\RefundPayment
                interface: App\Entity\RefundPaymentInterface

And update the database:

.. code-block:: bash

    php bin/console doctrine:migrations:diff
    php bin/console doctrine:migrations:migrate

> Customize refund page
> ---------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Modify the refund form:
```

> We need new input in refund view, so we need to overwrite a template `orderRefunds.html.twig` from Refund Plugin,
> copy the entire `orderRefunds.html.twig` to `templates/bundles/SyliusRefundPlugin/orderRefunds.html.twig` and add:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we have the new field on the Refund Payment, we will need to display its input on the refund form. 
We need to overwrite the template ``orderRefunds.html.twig`` from Refund Plugin.
To achieve that copy the entire ``orderRefunds.html.twig`` to ``templates/bundles/SyliusRefundPlugin/orderRefunds.html.twig``.
Then add:
```

.. code-block:: twig

    <div class="field">
        <label for="future-date">Future date</label>
        <input type="date" name="sylius_future_date" id="future-date" />
    </div>

> Customize `RefundUnits` command
> -------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Adjust the ``RefundUnits`` command:
```

> We want to create refund payment with extra date, so we need to provide this data in command,
> We can extend `RefundUnits` command from Refund Plugin and add new value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want the refund payments to be created with our extra ``scheduledAt`` date, therefore we need to provide this data in command,
We will extend the ``RefundUnits`` command from Refund Plugin and add the new value:
```

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    declare(strict_types=1);

    namespace App\Command;

    use Sylius\RefundPlugin\Command\RefundUnits as BaseRefundUnits;

    final class RefundUnits extends BaseRefundUnits
    {
        /** @var \DateTime|null */
        private $futureDate;

        public function __construct(
            string $orderNumber,
            array $units,
            array $shipments,
            int $paymentMethodId,
            string $comment,
            ?\DateTime $futureDate
        ) {
            parent::__construct($orderNumber, $units, $shipments, $paymentMethodId, $comment);
            $this->futureDate = $futureDate;
        }

        public function getFutureDate(): ?\DateTime
        {
            return $this->futureDate;
        }

        public function setFutureDate(?\DateTime $futureDate): void
        {
            $this->futureDate = $futureDate;
        }
    }

> Update `RefundUnitsCommandCreator`
> ----------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Update the ``RefundUnitsCommandCreator``:
```

> Controller related with Refund form dispatches `RefundUnits` command, but we provide service which creates command from request,
> so we need to overwrite `Sylius\RefundPlugin\Creator\RefundUnitsCommandCreatorInterface`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The controller related to the refund form dispatches the ``RefundUnits`` command, and there is a service that creates a command from request,
so we need to overwrite the ``Sylius\RefundPlugin\Creator\RefundUnitsCommandCreatorInterface``:
```

         */
        private function parseIdsToUnitRefunds(array $units, RefundType $refundType, string $unitRefundClass): array
        {
            $refundUnits = [];
            foreach ($units as $id => $unit) {
                $total = $this
                    ->unitRefundTotalCalculator
                    ->calculateForUnitWithIdAndType($id, $refundType, $this->getAmount($unit))
                ;

                $refundUnits[] = new $unitRefundClass((int) $id, $total);
            }

            return $refundUnits;
        }

        private function filterEmptyRefundUnits(array $units): array
        {
            return array_filter($units, function (array $refundUnit): bool {
                return
                    (isset($refundUnit['amount']) && $refundUnit['amount'] !== '') ||
                    isset($refundUnit['full'])
                ;
            });
        }

        private function getAmount(array $unit): ?float
        {
            if (isset($unit['full'])) {
                return null;
            }

            Assert::keyExists($unit, 'amount');

            return (float) $unit['amount'];
        }
    }

>     And register new service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And register the new service:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

    # config/services.yaml
    Sylius\RefundPlugin\Creator\RefundUnitsCommandCreatorInterface:
        class: App\Creator\RefundUnitsCommandCreator
        arguments:
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Calculator\UnitRefundTotalCalculatorInterface'

> 
> Modify `RefundUnitsHandler`
> ---------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Modify the ``RefundUnitsHandler``;
```

> Now, when we have a new command, we also need to overwrite related command handler:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, when we have a new command, we also need to overwrite the related command handler:
```

            /** @var string|null $currencyCode */
            $currencyCode = $order->getCurrencyCode();
            Assert::notNull($currencyCode);

            // Dispatching a new event
            $this->eventBus->dispatch(new UnitsRefunded(
                $orderNumber,
                $command->units(),
                $command->shipments(),
                $command->paymentMethodId(),
                $refundedTotal,
                $currencyCode,
                $command->comment(),
                $command->getFutureDate()
            ));
        }
    }

And register it:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # config/services.yaml
    Sylius\RefundPlugin\CommandHandler\RefundUnitsHandler:
        class: App\CommandHandler\RefundUnitsHandler
        arguments:
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Refunder\OrderItemUnitsRefunder'
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Refunder\OrderShipmentsRefunder'
            - '@sylius.event_bus'
            - '@sylius.repository.order'
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Validator\RefundUnitsCommandValidatorInterface'
        tags:
            - { name: messenger.message_handler, bus: sylius.command_bus }

> Modify `UnitsReturned` event
> ----------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Modify the ``UnitsReturned`` event:
```

            $this->eventBus->dispatch(new RefundPaymentGenerated(
                $refundPayment->getId(),
                $unitsRefunded->orderNumber(),
                $unitsRefunded->amount(),
                $unitsRefunded->currencyCode(),
                $unitsRefunded->paymentMethodId(),
                $this->relatedPaymentIdProvider->getForRefundPayment($refundPayment)
            ));

            $this->orderFullyRefundedStateResolver->resolve($unitsRefunded->orderNumber());
        }
    }

And register it:

.. code-block:: yaml

    Sylius\RefundPlugin\ProcessManager\RefundPaymentProcessManager:
            class: App\ProcessManager\RefundPaymentProcessManager
            arguments:
                - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\StateResolver\OrderFullyRefundedStateResolverInterface'
                - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Provider\RelatedPaymentIdProviderInterface'
                - '@App\Factory\RefundPaymentFactory'
                - '@sylius.repository.order'
                - '@doctrine.orm.default_entity_manager'
                - '@sylius.event_bus'
            tags:
                - {name: sylius_refund.units_refunded.process_step, priority: 50}

> Create Payment Factory
> ----------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Create the Payment Factory:
```

> In our handler we used the new Factory so, now it is time to implement it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our handler we have used a new Factory, so now it is time to implement it:
```

            OrderInterface $order,
            int $amount,
            string $currencyCode,
            string $state,
            int $paymentMethodId
        ): BaseRefundPaymentInterface {
            return $this->baseRefundPaymentFactory->createWithData($order, $amount, $currencyCode, $state, $paymentMethodId);
        }

        public function createWithDataAndDate(
            OrderInterface $order,
            int $amount,
            string $currencyCode,
            string $state,
            int $paymentMethodId,
            \DateTime $date
        ): RefundPaymentInterface {
            /** @var PaymentMethodInterface $paymentMethod */
            $paymentMethod = $this->paymentMethodRepository->find($paymentMethodId);

            $payment = new RefundPayment($order, $amount, $currencyCode, $state, $paymentMethod);
            $payment->setFuturePaymentDate($date);

            return $payment;
        }
    }

And register it:

.. code-block:: yaml

    App\Factory\RefundPaymentFactory:
        arguments:
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Factory\RefundPaymentFactoryInterface'
            - '@sylius.repository.payment_method'

> Display new field on refund payment
> -----------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Display the new field on the refund payment:
```

> And as the last step, we need to overwrite template `_refundPlugin.html.twig` from Refund Plugin, copy entire `_refundPlugin.html.twig`
> to `templates/bundles/SyliusRefundPlugin/Order/Admin/_refundPayments.html.twig` and add replace `header` with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And as the last step, we need to overwrite the template ``_refundPayments.html.twig`` from Refund Plugin.
Copy the entire ``_refundPayments.html.twig``
to ``templates/bundles/SyliusRefundPlugin/Order/Admin/_refundPayments.html.twig`` and add replace ``header`` with:
```

.. code-block:: twig

    <div class="header">
        {{ refund_payment.paymentMethod  }} {%  if refund_payment.futurePaymentDate is not null %} (Payment should be made in {{ refund_payment.futurePaymentDate|date('Y-M-d') }}) {% endif %}
    </div>

> And now it is everything, we have new field on `RefundPayment` with future date (when admin should make the payment), in your application you probably will add crone for automatize it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's it, we have a new field on Refund Payment with a "scheduled at" date (when admin/payment gateway 
should make the payment), in your application, you probably will add crone to automatize it.
```

How to customize the refund form?
=================================

    .. note::
        This cookbook describes customization of a feature available only with `Sylius/RefundPlugin <https://github.com/Sylius/RefundPlugin/>`_ installed.

>         A refund form is the form in which, as an Administrator, you can specify the exact amounts of money that will be refunded to a Customer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A refund form is the form in which, as an Administrator, you can specify the exact amounts of money that will be refunded to a Customer.
```

Why would you customize the refund form?
----------------------------------------

Refund Plugin provides a generic solution for refunding orders, it is enough for a basic refund but many shops need more custom functionalities.
For example, one may need to add refund payments scheduling, as they may be paid once a month.

How to add a field to the refund form?
--------------------------------------

The refund form is a form used to create the Refund Payment, thus in order to add a field to this form,
you need to first add it to the Refund Payment's model.

Refunds are processed with such a flow: ``command -> handler -> event -> listener``, and this flow we will also need to customize in order to process the data from the new field.

In this customization, we will be extending the refund form with a ``scheduledAt`` field,
which might be used then for scheduling the payments in the payment gateway.

> 1. Add the custom field to the Refund Payment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**1. Add the custom field to the Refund Payment:**
```

You may consider adding **bold** on the enumeration, I'm not sure what was the syntax in sphinx-doc.

    class RefundPayment extends BaseRefundPayment implements RefundPaymentInterface
    {
        /**
         * @var \DateTime|null
         *
         * @ORM\Column(type="datetime", nullable="true", name="scheduled_at")
         */
        protected $scheduledAt;

        public function getScheduledAt(): ?\DateTime
        {
            return $this->scheduledAt;
        }

        public function setScheduledAt(\DateTime $scheduledAt): void
        {
            $this->scheduledAt = $scheduledAt;
        }
    }

It should implement a new interface:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    declare(strict_types=1);

    namespace App\Entity;

    use Sylius\RefundPlugin\Entity\RefundPaymentInterface as BaseRefundPaymentInterface;

    interface RefundPaymentInterface extends BaseRefundPaymentInterface
    {
        public function getScheduledAt(): ?\DateTime;

        public function setScheduledAt(\DateTime $date): void;
    }

Remember to update resource configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # config/packages/sylius_refund.yaml
    sylius_resource:
    resources:
        sylius_refund.refund_payment:
            classes:
                model: App\Entity\RefundPayment

>                 interface: App\Entity\RefundPaymentInterface

Reviewer 3: Wrong indentation

                $comment,
                new \DateTime($request->request->get('sylius_scheduled_at'))
            );
        }

        /**
         * Parse shipment id's to ShipmentRefund with id and remaining total or amount passed in request
         *
         * @return array|UnitRefundInterface[]
         */
        private function parseIdsToUnitRefunds(array $units, RefundType $refundType, string $unitRefundClass): array
        {
            $refundUnits = [];
            foreach ($units as $id => $unit) {
                $total = $this
                    ->unitRefundTotalCalculator
                    ->calculateForUnitWithIdAndType($id, $refundType, $this->getAmount($unit))
                ;

                $refundUnits[] = new $unitRefundClass((int) $id, $total);
            }

            return $refundUnits;
        }

        private function filterEmptyRefundUnits(array $units): array
        {
            return array_filter($units, function (array $refundUnit): bool {
                return
                    (isset($refundUnit['amount']) && $refundUnit['amount'] !== '') ||
                    isset($refundUnit['full'])
                ;
            });

>         }

Reviewer 2: Perhaps both functions could be extracted to separate service/services? Despite `InvalidRefundAmount::withValidationConstraint` they can be combined easily and mentioned exception can be placed in this service as well. Or perhaps one implementation with two services oriented on order item and shipment separated? An additional side effect of such implementation would be to hardcode classes and types in a service container instead of this class.

Reviewer 3: I've improved this cookbook in a separate PR: https://github.com/Sylius/Sylius/pull/12748 as it waits for changes in RefundPlugin

                $refundedTotal,
                $currencyCode,
                $command->comment(),
                $command->getScheduledAt()
            ));
        }
    }

And register it:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # config/services.yaml
    Sylius\RefundPlugin\CommandHandler\RefundUnitsHandler:
        class: App\CommandHandler\RefundUnitsHandler
        arguments:
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Refunder\OrderItemUnitsRefunder'
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Refunder\OrderShipmentsRefunder'
            - '@sylius.event_bus'
            - '@sylius.repository.order'
            - '@Sylius\RefundPlugin\Validator\RefundUnitsCommandValidatorInterface'
        tags:
            - { name: messenger.message_handler, bus: sylius.command_bus }

6. Modify the ``UnitsReturned`` event:

In previous command handler we are dispatching a new event so now we need to create this event and related event handler:

event:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php

    declare(strict_types=1);

    namespace App\Event;

    use Sylius\RefundPlugin\Event\UnitsRefunded as BaseUnitsRefunded;

    class UnitsRefunded extends BaseUnitsRefunded
    {
        /** @var \DateTime */

>         public $futureDate;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        public $scheduledAt;
```

        public function __construct(
            string $orderNumber,
            array $units,
            array $shipments,
            int $paymentMethodId,
            int $amount,
            string $currencyCode,
            string $comment,
            \DateTime $scheduledAt
        ) {
            parent::__construct($orderNumber, $units, $shipments, $paymentMethodId, $amount, $currencyCode, $comment);

>             $this->futureDate = $futureDate;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            $this->scheduledAt = $scheduledAt;
```

            OrderRepositoryInterface $orderRepository,
            EntityManagerInterface $entityManager,
            MessageBusInterface $eventBus
        ) {
            $this->orderFullyRefundedStateResolver = $orderFullyRefundedStateResolver;
            $this->relatedPaymentIdProvider = $relatedPaymentIdProvider;
            $this->refundPaymentFactory = $refundPaymentFactory;
            $this->orderRepository = $orderRepository;
            $this->entityManager = $entityManager;
            $this->eventBus = $eventBus;
        }

        public function next(UnitsRefunded $unitsRefunded): void
        {
            /** @var OrderInterface|null $order */
            $order = $this->orderRepository->findOneByNumber($unitsRefunded->orderNumber());
            Assert::notNull($order);

            $refundPayment = $this->refundPaymentFactory->createWithDataAndDate(
                $order,
                $unitsRefunded->amount(),
                $unitsRefunded->currencyCode(),
                RefundPaymentInterface::STATE_NEW,
                $unitsRefunded->paymentMethodId(),
                $unitsRefunded->getScheduledAt()

>             );

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this could be part of `RefundUnitsHandler` and we could simplify events in general

Reviewer 3: It will be more complicated than I initially thought, as creating RefundPayments and CreditMemos is based on these events. A change like this would force us to change the logic behind creating RefundPayments and CreditMemos in proper order. It would also change the other [cookbook](https://docs.sylius.com/en/latest/cookbook/payments/refund-process.html) so I would like to stay with events in RefundPlugin 1.0.
